Ghana Communication Technology University (GCTU) Course Code : IT452 Course Title: Computer Security (3 Credit) Level: 400 Lecturer :PRINCE MODEY

Objectives By the end of the lecture, students should be able to: ❑Explain computer security ❑Explain types of computer security ❑State and explain steps to ensure computer security ❑Explain Threats, Attacks, and Assets

What is Security? ➢Security refers protection of assets. ➢This implies that you have to know your assets and their value. ➢Classification of protection measures are: ➢prevention -taking measures that prevent your assets from being damaged; ➢detection -taking measures that allow you to detect when an asset has been damaged, how it has been damaged, and who has caused the damage; ➢reaction -taking measures that allow you to recover your assets or to recover from damage to your assets.

Security Management ➢‘Security is a people problem’ that cannot be solved by technology alone. ➢The legal system has to define the boundaries of acceptable behaviour through data protection and computer misuse laws. ➢Responsibility for security within organizations, be they companies or universities, resides ultimately with management. ➢Protecting the assets of an organization is the responsibility of management. ➢Assets include sensitive information such as product plans, customer records, financial data, and the IT infrastructure of the organization. ➢A brief policy document signed by the chief executive that lays down the ground rules can serve as a starting point.

Security Policies ➢It is the core concept in computer security. ➢It is a statement that defines the security objectives of an organization; it has to state what needs to be protected; it may also indicate how this is to be done. ➢Example: a policy may regulate access to company premises. ➢A policy may regulate access to documents. ➢A policy may define password formats and renewal intervals.

Security Policies (cont.) ➢Organizational security policy: The set of laws, rules, and practices that regulate how an organization manages, protects, and distributes resources to achieve specified security policy objectives. ➢Automated security policy: The set of restrictions and properties that specify how a computing system prevents information and computing resources from being used to violate an organizational security policy.

What is Computer Security? ➢Computer security refers to protecting and securing computers and their related data, networks, software ,andhardware against : ➢unauthorized access, ➢misuse, ➢theft, ➢information loss, and ➢other security issues. ➢Computer security deals with the techniques employed to maintain security within a computer system. ➢The Internet has made our lives easier, however, ➢it has also exposed system security at the risk of being infected by a virus, being hacked, information theft, damage to the system, and much more.

Components of Computer Security? The basic components of computer security are: ➢confidentiality, ➢integrity, and ➢availability .

Confidentiality ➢It is the concealment of information or resources or data. ➢The need for keeping information secret arises from the use of computers in sensitive fields such as government and industry. ➢Access control mechanisms support confidentiality. ➢One access control mechanism for preserving confidentiality is cryptography. ➢A cryptographic key controls access to the unscrambled data. ➢cryptographic key itself becomes another datum to be protected. ➢System -dependent mechanisms can prevent processes from illicitly accessing information. ➢Data protected only by system -dependent mechanisms can be read when the controls fail or are bypassed.

Integrity ➢Integrity refers to the trustworthiness of data or resources ➢It is preventing improper or unauthorized change. ➢Integrity includes data integrity (the content of the information) and origin integrity (the source of the data, often called authentication). ➢The source of the information may bear on its accuracy and credibility and on the trust that people place in the information.

Integrity Mechanisms Integrity mechanisms fall into two classes: ➢prevention mechanisms: seek to maintain the integrity of the data by blocking any unauthorized attempts to change the data or any attempts to change the data in unauthorized ways. ➢It may occur when a user tries to change data which she has no authority to change. ➢May occur when a user authorized to make certain changes in the data tries to change the data in other ways. ➢Detection mechanisms: do not try to prevent violations of integrity; ➢they simply report that the data’s integrity is no longer trustworthy.

Integrity Mechanisms (cont.) ➢Detection mechanisms may analyze system events (user or system actions) to detect problems or (more commonly) may analyze the data itself to see if required or expected constraints still hold. ➢It may report the actual cause of the integrity violation (a specific part of a file was altered), or they may simply report that the file is now corrupt.

Availability ➢Availability refers to the ability to use the information or resource desired. ➢Availability is an important aspect of reliability as well as of system design because an unavailable system is at least as bad as no system at all. ➢The aspect of availability that is relevant to security is that someone may deliberately arrange to deny access to data or a service by making it unavailable. ➢System designs may implement a statistical model to analyze expected patterns of use, and mechanisms ensure availability when that statistical model holds.

Types of computer security Computer security is of four types: i.Cyber Security: is securing computers, electronic devices, networks , programs, systems from cyber attacks. ➢Cyber attacks are those attacks that happen when our system is connected to the Internet. ii.Information Security: protecting system’s information from theft, illegal use and piracy from unauthorized use. ➢Information security has mainly three objectives: confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information.

Types of computer security (cont.) Computer security is of four types: iii.Application Security: securing applications and data so that they don’t get hacked. ➢databases of the applications remain safe and private to the owner itself so that user’s data remains confidential. ➢Network Security: securing a network and protecting the user’s information about who is connected through that network. ➢hackers steal the packets of data through sniffing and spoofing attacks, man in the middle attack, war driving, etc, and misuse the data for their benefits.

Types of Cyber Security ➢Denial of service attack or DOS: attackers disrupt the services of the particular network by sending infinite requests and temporary or permanently making the network or machine resources unavailable to the intended audience. ➢Backdoor: malware, trojan horse or virus gets installed in your system and start affecting it’s security along with the main file. ➢example: suppose you are installing free software from a certain website on the Internet. ➢Along with this software, a malicious file also gets installed, ➢As you execute the installed software that file’s malware gets affected and starts affecting your computer security.

Types of Cyber Security (cont.) ➢Eavesdropping: refers to secretly listening to someone’s talk without their permission or knowledge. ➢Attackers try to steal, manipulate, modify, and hack information or systems by passively listening to network communication, knowing passwords etc. ➢Example: suppose you are talking to another person in your organization ➢third person listens to your private talks then he/she is said to eavesdrop on your conversation. ➢your conversation on the internet may be eavesdropped by attackers listening to your private conversation by connecting to your network if it is insecure.

Types of Cyber Security (cont.) ➢Phishing: pronounced as “fishing”. ➢The user is tricked by the attacker and gains the trust of the user or acts as a genuine person and then steals the information by ditching. ➢Not only attackers but certain websites that seem to be genuine, but they are fraud sites. ➢These sites trick the users and they end up giving their personal information such as login details or bank details card numbers etc. ➢Phishing types: Voice phishing, text phishing etc.

Types of Cyber Security (cont.) ➢Spoofing: the act of masquerading as a valid entity through falsification of data(such as an IP address or username), to gain access to information or resources that one is otherwise unauthorized to obtain. ➢Spoofing types: email spoofing, IP address spoofing, MAC spoofing, biometric spoofing etc. ➢Malware: made up of two terms: Malicious + Software = Malware . ➢Malware intrudes into the system and is designed to damage our computers. ➢types of malware are adware, spyware, ransomware, Trojan horse, etc. ➢Social engineering: involves manipulating users psychologically and extracting confidential or sensitive data from them by gaining their trust. ➢The attacker generally exploits the trust of people or users by relying on their cognitive basis.

Types of Cyber Security (cont.) ➢Polymorphic Attacks: Poly means “many” and morph means “form”, ➢The attacker adopts multiple forms and changes them so that they are not recognized easily. ➢These kinds of attacks are difficult to detect due to their changing forms.

Steps to ensure computer security Always keep your Operating System up to date. Always use a secure network connection. Always install an Antivirus and keep it up to date. Enable firewall. A firewall is a system designed to prevent unauthorized access to/from a computer or even to a private network of computers. Use strong passwords. Don’t trust someone easily. Keep your personal information hidden. Don’t download attachments that come along with e -mails unless and until you know that e -mail is from a genuine source.

Steps to ensure computer security (cont.) Don’t purchase things online from anywhere. Learn about computer security and ethics. If you are attacked, immediately inform the cyber cell so that they may take appropriate action and also protect others from getting attacked by the same person. Don’t use pirated content.

Risks, Threats, Vulnerabilities, Attacks, and Assets

Risks It is associated with the consequences of uncertain events. Hazard risks are related to damaging events, Opportunity risks are related to events that might also have a positive outcome, e.g. financial investment on the stock exchange. IT risk analysis looks at hazard risks. It can be conducted during the design phase of a system, during the implementation phase, and operations stage.

Risks (cont.) It can be applied during the development of new components, e.g. in the area of software security, specifically for the IT infrastructure of an enterprise, comprehensively for all information assets of an enterprise There are various ways of structuring risk analysis. Risk analysis, threat analysis, or vulnerability scoring are not necessarily different activities. They may be different names for the same objective, but they may also express a different focus when assessing potential damage.

Risks (cont.) Risk is the possibility that some incident or attack can cause damage to your enterprise. An attack against an IT system consists of a sequence of actions, exploiting vulnerabilities in the system, until the attacker’s goals have been achieved. To assess the risk posed by the attack you have to evaluate the impact of the attack and the likelihood of the attack occurring. likelihood depends on the exposure of your system to potential attackers and how easily the attack can be mounted (exploitability of vulnerabilities).

Risks (cont.)

Threats A threat is a potential violation of security. Or A threat is an undesirable negative impact on your assets. Violation actually should not occur for there to be a threat. Those actions are called attacks.

Threats (cont.) Microsoft’s STRIDE threat model for software security lists the following categories Spoofing identities -an agent pretends to be somebody else; this can be done to avoid responsibility or to misuse authority given to someone else. Tampering with data -violates the integrity of an asset; e.g. security settings are changed to give the attacker more privileges. Repudiation -an agent denies having acted to escape responsibility. Information disclosure -violates the confidentiality of an asset; information disclosed to the wrong parties may lose its value (e.g. trade secrets); your organization may face penalties if it does not properly protect information (e.g. personal information about individuals).

Threats (cont.) Microsoft’s STRIDE threat model for software security lists the following categories Denial of service -violates the availability of an asset; denial -of-service attacks can make websites temporarily unavailable; the media have reported that such attacks have been used for blackmail. Elevation of privilege -an agent gains more privileges beyond its entitlement.

Vulnerabilities Vulnerabilities are weaknesses of a system that could be accidentally or intentionally exploited to damage assets. typical vulnerabilities are: accounts with system privileges where the default password, such as ‘MANAGER’, has not been changed; programs with unnecessary privileges; programs with known flaws; weak access control settings on resources, e.g. having kernel memory world -writable; weak firewall configurations that allow access to vulnerable services.

Attacks A threat materializes when an attack succeeds. An attack is a sequence of steps. It may start innocuously, gathering information needed to move on to gain privileges on one machine, and from there jump to another machine until the final target is reached.

Attack Tree for Obtaining Another User’s Password

Assets Assets include: hardware -laptops, servers, routers, mobile phones, netbooks, smart cards, etc.; software -applications, operating systems, database management systems, source code, object code, etc.; data and information -essential data for running and planning your business, design documents, digital content, data about your customers, etc.; reputation. Assets such as hardware, can be valued according to their monetary replacement costs. assets such as data and information, this is more difficult.

Try questions ➢Briefly explain the following ➢email spoofing, IP address spoofing, MAC spoofing, biometric spoofing. ➢What is computer security? ➢Differentiate between threats and attacks. ➢State the steps to ensure computer or information security.

