Ghana Communication Technology University (GCTU) Course Code : IT452 Course Title: Computer Security (3 Credit) Level: 400 Lecturer :PRINCE MODEY

Recap ➢Explain computer security ➢Explain types of computer security ➢State and explain steps to ensure computer security ➢Explain Threats, Attacks, and Assets

User Identification and Authentication

Objectives By the end of the lecture, students should be able to: ❑Explain identification and authentication, and the methods used for each ❑Discuss human authentication factors ❑Differentiate between single -factor, two -factor, multi -factor, and mutual authentication ❑Explain the purpose, advantages, and disadvantages of single sign -on (SSO)

Introduction ➢There must be a way to provide or deny access to users of a computer system. ➢Thus, to identify, authenticate, and authorize a user. ➢The system will authorize your access provided you were previously approved for access to the system. ➢Approval is given to a user through identification, authentication, and authorization processes.

Identification ➢Identification is evidence of who a subject claims to be. ➢Identification may be provided by a username or an identifying number such as an account number. ➢Identification describes a method of ensuring that a subject is the entity it claims to be.

Identification Component Requirements ➢Each value should be unique, for user accountability ➢A standard naming scheme should be followed ➢The values should be non -descriptive of the users’ position or task ➢The values should not be shared between the users.

Authentication Def. 1 ➢Authentication is the method of proving the subject’s identity. E.g.: Password, Passphrase, PIN. Def. 2 ➢Authentication is the process of verifying a user’s identity. Def. 3 ➢Authentication means proving that the identification is valid. E.g.: a user may authenticate using a password or PIN. Def. 4 ➢User authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a user when that user logs in to a computer system.

Authentication Factors ➢Something a person knows -E.g.: passwords, PIN -least expensive, least secure ➢Something a person has -E.g.: Access Card, key -expensive, secure ➢Something a person is -E.g.: Biometrics -most expensive, most secure

Authentication Methods ➢Biometrics ➢Passwords ➢Cryptographic Keys ➢Passphrase ➢Memory Cards ➢Smart Card

Biometrics Authentication Methods ➢It Verifies an individual’s identity by analyzing a unique personal attribute or behaviour . ➢It is the most effective and accurate method for verifying identification. ➢It is the most expensive authentication mechanism.

Types of Biometric Systems ➢Finger Print: bifurcation exhibited by the friction edges and some minutiae of the finger ➢Palm Scan: are based on the creases, ridges, and grooves that are unique in each palm ➢Hand Geometry: verifies the length and width user’s hand and fingers ➢Retina Scan: verifies the blood vessel pattern of the retina on the backside of the eyeball. ➢Iris Scan: verifies the coloured portion of the eye that surrounds the pupil. ➢Signature Dynamics: electrical signals generated due to the physical motion of the hand during signing a document ➢Keyboard Dynamics: electrical signals are generated while the user types in the keys (passphrase) on the keyboard. ➢Voice Print: based on human voice ➢Facial Scan: different bone structures, nose ridges, eye widths, forehead sizes and chin shapes of the face. ➢Handy Topography: based on the different peaks, valleys, overall shape and curvature of the hand.

Types of Biometric Errors ➢Type I Error: When a biometric system rejects an authorized individual ( false rejection rate) ➢Type II Error: When a biometric system accepts imposters who should be rejected (false acceptance rate) ➢Crossover Error Rate (CER): The point at which the false rejection rate equals the false acceptance rate. ➢It is also called an Equal Error Rate (EER).

Password Authentication Methods ➢It is the most common form of system identification and authentication mechanism ➢A password is a protected string of characters that is used to authenticate an individual. ➢Password Management includes: ➢Password should be properly guaranteed, updated, and kept secret to provide and effective security ➢Password generators can be used to generate passwords that are uncomplicated, pronounceable, non -dictionary words. ➢If the user chooses his passwords, the system should enforce certain password requirements like insisting on using special char, no of char, case sensitivity etc.

Bootstrapping Password Protection ➢Passwords are meant to be secrets shared between the user and the system authenticating the user. ➢bootstrap a system so that the password ends up in the right places: ➢do not give the password to the caller but call back an authorized phone number from your files, e.g. from an internal company address book; ➢call back someone else, e.g. the caller’s manager or local security officer; ➢send passwords that are valid only for a single login request so that the user has to change immediately to a new password (intercepting the first password is thus of limited value); ➢send mail by courier with personal delivery; ➢request confirmation on a different channel to activate the user account, e.g. enter the password on a web page and send confirmation by SMS (phone).

Guessing Password Prevention ➢Change default passwords ➢Password length ➢Password format ➢Avoid obvious passwords

Cognitive Passwords ➢Cognitive passwords are facts or opinion -based information used to verify an individual identity (e.g.: mother’s maidens name) ➢This is best used for helpdesk services and occasionally used services.

One -Time or Dynamic Passwords ➢It is a token -based system used for authentication purposes where the service is used only once ➢It is used in environments that require a higher level of security than static password provides ➢Types of token generators: ➢Synchronous (e.g.: SecureID) ➢Asynchronous

Synchronous Generator ➢A synchronous token device/generator synchronizes with the authentication service by any of the two means. ➢Time -Based: Thetoken device and the authentication service must hold the same time within their internal clocks. ➢The time value on the token device and a secret key are used to create a one - time password. ➢The server decrypts this password and compares it to the value that is expected. ➢Counter Based: the user will need to initiate the logon sequence on the computer and push a button on the token device. ➢This value and a base secret are hashed and displayed to the user. ➢The user enters this resulting value and a user ID to authenticate.

Asynchronous Generator ➢A token device that is using an asynchronous token -generating method uses a challenge/response scheme to authenticate the user. ➢the authentication server sends the user a challenge, a random value also called a nonce. ➢The user enters this random value into the token device, which encrypts it and returns a value that the user uses as a one -time password. ➢The user sends this value, along with a username, to the authentication server. ➢the authentication server decrypts the value and if it is the same challenge value that was sent earlier, the user is authenticated

Cryptographic Keys Authentication Method ➢Uses private keys and Digital Signatures ➢Provides a higher level of security than passwords.

Passphrase Authentication Method ➢A passphrase is a sequence of characters that is longer than a password and in some cases, takes the place of a password during an authentication process. ➢The application transforms the passphrase into a virtual password and into a format required by the application ➢It is more secure than passwords

Memory Cards Authentication Method ➢Holds information but cannot process them ➢More secure than passwords but costly ➢E.g.: Swipe cards, ATM cards

Smart Card Authentication Method ➢Holds information, processes information and can provide two -factor authentication (knows and has) ➢Categories of Smart Cards ➢Contact ➢Contactless ➢Hybrid -has 2 chips and supports both contact and contactless ➢Combi -has a microprocessor that can communicate with both a contact as well as a contact reader. ➢More expensive and tamperproof than memory cards

Types of smartcard attacks ➢Fault generation: Introducing computational errors into smart cards to uncover the encryption keys that are being used and stored on cards ➢Side Channel Attacks: These are non -intrusive attacks and are used to uncover sensitive information about how a component works without trying to compromise any type of flaw or weakness. ➢examples ➢Differential Power Analysis: Examining the power emissions that are released during processing ➢Electromagnetic Analysis: Examining the frequency that is emitted ➢Timing: How long a specific process takes to complete

Types of smartcard attacks ➢Software Attacks: Inputting instructions into the card that will allow for the attacker to extract account information. ➢examples ➢Microprobing : Uses needles to remove the outer protective material on the card circuits by using ultrasonic vibrations ➢making it easy to tap the card ROM chip ➢NOTE : Read about ➢Smart Card Standards ➢Differentiate between single -factor, two -factor, multi -factor, and mutual authentication

Types of authentication systems ➢Single -Factor authentication ➢Two-factor Authentication ➢Multi-Factor authentication system

Single -Factor Authentication ➢First method of security developed. ➢The user has to enter the username and the password to confirm whether that user is logging in or not. ➢If the username or password is wrong; ➢the user will not be allowed to log in or access the system.

Single -Factor Authentication (cont.) ➢Advantages ➢It is a very simple -to-use and straightforward system. ➢it is not costly. ➢The user does not need any huge technical skills. ➢Disadvantages ➢It is not secure. ➢It depends on the strength of the password entered by the user. ➢The protection level in Single -Factor Authentication is much lower.

Two-factor Authentication (2FA) ➢Users provide two different authentication factors to verify themselves. ➢It adds an additional layer of security to the standard username -and- password method of online identification. ➢The user has to give a username, password, and other information. ➢2FA requires the combination of something the user knows (like a password), something the user has (such as a mobile device, a security token, or a smart card), or something the user is (like a fingerprint or facial recognition). ➢There are various types of authentication systems used by the user to secure the system.

Two-factor Authentication (2FA) (cont.) ➢Advantages ➢The Two -Factor Authentication System provides better security than the Single - Factor Authentication system. ➢The productivity and flexibility increase in the two -factor authentication system. ➢Two-factor authentication prevents the loss of trust. ➢Disadvantages ➢It is time -consuming.

Importance of 2FA (cont.) ➢Increased Security: 2FA adds an extra layer of protection beyond just a username and password. ➢Reduced Fraud and Identity Theft: 2FA makes it much harder for attackers to impersonate users and gain access to accounts, thereby reducing the risk of identity theft and fraud. ➢Enhanced Trust: implementing 2FA can increase customer trust; ➢it demonstrates a commitment to protecting user data and privacy. ➢Compliance with Regulations: Many industries and government bodies now require 2FA to comply with data protection and privacy laws; ➢helping organizations avoid legal and financial penalties.

Importance of 2FA (cont.) ➢Mitigation of Password Weakness: Since many users employ weak or reused passwords; ➢2FA helps mitigate the risks associated with poor password practices. ➢Protection Against Phishing: 2FA can protect users even if they inadvertently divulge their passwords through phishing attacks; ➢the attacker would still need the second factor to gain access.

Types of 2FA ➢Wireless Tokens: ➢Automatic pairing of authentication factors is done in Wireless tokens ➢No requirement for keying character sequences. ➢These make the authentication process easy. ➢unwanted access to mobile devices is prevented by automatic alarm. ➢Virtual Tokens: ➢Virtual tokens are a new concept in two -factor authentication. ➢They utilize the user’s existing internet device ➢It reduces the expenditures commonly associated with the implementation and preservation of multi -factor solutions. ➢It does not suffer from man -in-the-middle attacks and other forms.

Types of 2FA (cont.) ➢Magnetic Cards: ➢One solution of two -factor authentication is magnetic cards connected with secure, encrypting card readers. ➢Magnetic cards may be credit cards, debit cards, ATM cards, etc. ➢A correlative number called a dynamic digital identifier is provided in each swipe of the card that can be scored and matched to the activated value. ➢SMS One -Time Password: ➢SMS one -time password ensures two -factor authentication by using information sent as an SMS to the user as part of the login process. ➢The user receives a unique, temporary PIN code in the SMS. ➢The user then enters this code into the website to prove his identity. ➢This process provides an extra layer of online security in addition to a simple username and password.

Types of 2FA (cont.) ➢Additional Phone Token: ➢mobile phone is used as the processor ➢It consists of the security token in the form of a Java ME client. ➢this authentication is liable to Man In the Middle (MITM) attacks. ➢the victim has entered their login credentials to a counterfeit website. ➢This website would pass these credentials to the appropriate website using new protocols. ➢Then this appropriate website would send a one -time password to the user’s mobile device. ➢The victim would enter the one -time password onto the counterfeit website, which then forwards this to the appropriate website from where the fraudster may use it to complete their access.

Types of 2FA (cont.) ➢Universal Serial Bus: ➢A USB token generally has a much larger storage capacity for login credentials than a smart card. ➢It cannot be fitted in a wallet, but can easily be attached to a key ring. ➢They are costly to set up and support ➢They are exposed to various forms of theft and fraud. ➢Mobile Signature : ➢Mobile Signatures are digital signatures created on a mobile device on any of the SIM cards by using a private key. ➢system text to be signed in to the SIM card on a mobile phone secure. ➢Then with the help of the text received by the user, who checks it before entering a PIN code to create a signature which is then sent back to the service provider. ➢Typical public key infrastructure (PKI) systems are used to verify the signature.

How to Enable 2FA on an Android Device ➢Step 1 : Log in to your Google account at myaccount.google.com on your Android phone. ➢Step 2: Click the Security tab. ➢Step 3: Click 2 -Step Verification ➢Step 4: Click ‘Get Started’. ➢Step 5: Enter your Google password to confirm it is you. ➢Step 6: Click ‘Try It Now’. ➢Step 7: Tap ‘Continue‘ on the next page that appears on your smartphone or tablet. ➢Step 8: Confirm your phone number as a backup alternative in case Google Prompt does not work. ➢Step 9: Enter the code that is texted to your number and click on ‘Next’.

Multi-factor Authentication System (MFA) ➢More than one factor of authentication is needed. ➢MFA takes two or more authentication methods from different categories to confirm a user’s identity ➢It gives better security to the user. ➢Any type of keylogger or phishing attack will not be possible in a Multi -Factor Authentication system. ➢It assures the user; ➢information will not get stolen from them.

Multi-factor Authentication System ➢Advantages ➢No risk of security. ➢No information could get stolen. ➢No risk of any key -logger activity. ➢No risk of any data getting captured . ➢Disadvantage ➢It is time -consuming. ➢it can rely on third parties.

Password Security ➢Password choice is a critical security issue. ➢Single -factor authentication is extremely easy to compromise. ➢Good password policies must be put in place to ensure that passwords cannot be compromised. ➢Some common policies are: ➢Require complex passwords: One reason passwords are compromised is that they can be easily guessed. ➢Change passwords regularly: users must change their passwords regularly. ➢Train employees not to give away passwords: employees may be tricked into giving away passwords through e -mail phishing.

Guessing Password ➢An attacker may follow two basic guessing strategies: ➢exhaustive search (brute force): try all possible combinations of valid symbols, up to a certain length; ➢intelligent search: search through a restricted namespace, ➢e.g. try passwords that are somehow associated with a user; ➢such as a name, names of friends and relatives, car brand, car registration number, phone number, etc., or try passwords that are generally popular. ➢The common method is a dictionary attack, trying all passwords from a dictionary.

How to protect your Password ➢Change default passwords: often come with default accounts such as ‘system’ with default password ‘manager’. ➢Password length: a minimal password length should be prescribed. ➢Standard Unix systems have a maximal password length set to eight characters only. ➢Password format: mix upper and lower case symbols and include numerical and other non -alphabetical symbols in your password. ➢Avoid obvious passwords: do not be surprised to find out that attackers are equipped with lists of popular passwords ➢dictionary attacks have extended the scope of ‘obvious’ quite substantially.

How to Improve Password Security ➢Password checkers: use tools that check passwords against some dictionary of ‘weak’ passwords and prevent users from choosing such passwords. ➢Password generation: some operating systems include password generators, producing random but pronounceable passwords. ➢Password ageing: an expiry date for passwords is set, forcing users to change passwords at regular intervals. ➢Limit login attempts: the system monitors unsuccessful login attempts and reacts by locking the user account completely or at least for a certain period to prevent or discourage further attempts.

Protecting the Password File ➢Passwords are kept in the password file in the system. ➢the system compares the password entered by the user against a value stored in the password file. ➢the password file might be compromised. ➢The password can be intercepted by a keylogger at the machine at the user’s end or in transit. ➢An attacker can directly impersonate a user when the contents of an unencrypted password file are disclosed or when entries in the password file can be modified.

Protecting the Password File (cont.) ➢To protect the password file, do the following: ➢cryptographic protection; ➢access control enforced by the operating system; ➢a combination of cryptographic protection and access control, possibly with further enhancements to slow down dictionary attacks.

Techniques for Passwords Attack ➢Electronic monitoring: Listening to network traffic to capture information, especially when a user is sending her password to an authentication server. ➢Access the password file: Usually done on the authentication server. ➢The password file contains many users' passwords ➢can be the source of a lot of damage. ➢Brute force attacks: Performed with tools that cycle through many possible character, number, and symbol combinations to uncover a password. ➢Dictionary attacks: Files of thousands of words are used to compare to the user's password until a match is found. ➢Social engineering: An attacker falsely convinces an individual that she has the necessary authorization to access specific resources

Single Sign -on ➢It is not convenient to enter passwords over and over again when navigating through cyberspace for a bit of information. ➢For instance entering ➢first password at the workstation, ➢second password to get out on the network, ➢third password to access the server, ➢fourth password to access the database management system, ➢fifth password to open a table in the database. ➢Single sign -on service solves this problem ➢Single sign -on (SSO) is an identification system allowing users to access multiple applications and websites with one login credentials.

Single Sign -on (cont.) ➢SSO authentication works as follows: ➢A user logs into one of the service providers, or into a central portal (such as an company intranet or college student portal) using SSO login credentials. ➢When the user is successfully authenticated, the SSO solution generates a session authentication token containing specific information about the user's identity -a username, email address, etc. This token is stored with the user's web browser, or in the SSO system. ➢When the user attempts to access another trusted service provider, the application checks with the SSO system to determine if user is already authenticated for the session.

Benefits of Single Sign -on ➢Reduced password fatigue ➢Fewer password -and credential -related vulnerabilities ➢Fewer help desk calls ➢Simplified security management ➢Improved regulatory compliance

Access Control

What is Access Control ? ➢Access controls are security features that control how users and systems communicate and interact with other systems and resources. ➢Access Control is limiting access to a system or resources. ➢Access control systems perform identification, authentication, and authorization of users and entities by evaluating required login credentials ➢Access is the flow of information between a subject and a resource. ➢A subject is an active entity that requests access to a resource or the data within a resource. E.g.: user, program, process etc. ➢A resource is an entity that contains the information. E.g.: Computer, Database, File, Program, Printer etc. ➢Access controls give organisations the ability to control, restrict, monitor, and protect resource availability, integrity and confidentiality

Components of Access Control ➢Authentication: is the process of verifying the identity of a user. ➢Authorization: determines the extent of access to the network and what type of services and resources are accessible by the authenticated user. ➢Access: This allows users to access the resource to which they are attempting to log in. ➢Manage: adding and removing authentication and authorization for users and systems. ➢Managing these systems can be difficult in modern IT setups that combine cloud services and physical systems. ➢Audit: This allows managers to collect data about user activities and analyze it to identify possible access violations.

Principles of Access Control ➢Principle of Least Privilege: if nothing has been specifically configured for an individual or the groups, ➢the user should not be able to access that resource i.e. Default no access ➢Separation of Duties: Separating any conflicting areas of responsibility so as to reduce opportunities for unauthorized or unintentional modification or misuse of organizational assets and/or information. ➢Need to know: It is based on the concept that individuals should be given access only to the information that they absolutely require in order to perform their job duties

Access Control Challenges ➢Distributed IT Systems: IT systems frequently combine internet and on - premise networks. ➢These systems may be distributed geographically and comprise various devices, assets, and virtual machines. ➢Access is allowed to all of these devices, and keeping track of them can be challenging. ➢Policy Management: Policy makers within the organization create policies, and the IT department converts the planned policies into code for implementation. ➢Coordination between these two groups is essential for keeping the access control system up to date and functioning properly.

Access Control Challenges (cont.) ➢Monitoring and Reporting: constant check on access control systems to guarantee compliance with corporate policies and regulatory laws. ➢Any violations or changes must be recognized and reported immediately. ➢Access Control Models: Access control mechanisms provide varying levels of precision. ➢Choosing the right access control strategy for your organization allows you to balance acceptable security with employee efficiency.

Types of Access Control ➢Physical Access Control: Physical access control restricts entry to campuses, buildings, rooms and physical IT assets. ➢Logical Access Control: Logical access control limits connections to computer networks, system files and data.

Access Control Models ➢It is a framework that dictates how users access objects. ➢It uses access control technologies and security mechanisms to enforce the rules and objectives of the model. ➢types of access control models are: ➢Discretionary, ➢Mandatory, and ➢Nondiscretionary (also called role -based).

